---
layout: default
title: Prayers to Saint Jerome
utl_id: 2769
---

### Description:

Chicago, Newberry Library, VAULT Case MS 122 <br>
Battista Malatesta <br>
_Prayers to Saint Jerome_ <br>
between ca.1450 and 1500

<table border="0.5" cellpadding="1" cellspacing="1" style="width: 200px; background-color:#F8F8F8;"><tbody><tr><td>Go to <a href="https://italian-paleography.library.utoronto.ca/content/transcript_IP_003" style="font-weight:300;" target="_blank">Transcription</a><br />
			Go to <a href="https://italian-paleography.library.utoronto.ca/islandora/object/italianpaleography%3AIP_003" style="font-weight:300;" target="_blank">Manuscript</a> page</td>
</tr></tbody></table>

### Background:

This elegant roll manuscript was designed and created for a woman who held a special veneration for St. Jerome.  Simple illuminations decorate the top and left margins, and an historiated initial introduces its main text—a laudatory poem to St. Jerome in vernacular Italian.  This roll is made up of two membranes of approximately equal length, ivory rods support its top and bottom, and decorations are of a typical Florentine design featuring acanthus scrolls and figures of a bird and a moth in soft colors highlighted with gold accents.  The historiated initial "O" houses a haloed figure holding a rosary and stone.

The roll form facilitated ambulatory prayer, thus this manuscript served a practical purpose as a devotional device.  Its relatively small size suggests that the piece was fashioned for use by one person at a time, or by a very small group, whereby it was unrolled as the verses were recited; it was manageable, portable, and easily stored.  The ivory rods and string were likely added later to suspend the manuscript as a wall decoration.  Adjectival agreement in the text evidences a female owner; this roll could have served any of the many female religious associations that flourished in Tuscany in the second half of the fifteenth century.

The Newberry’s Italian roll connects with St. Jerome’s world in a nostalgic way, its novelty residing in its appeal as a _faux_ artifact of the classical world.  The miniature rendering of the saint as penitent, the _Confiteor_ coda, and its roll form are fitting complements to a poem that paints a portrait of the saint as a type of patristic _uomo universale_.

<p style="text-align:right">- Tonia Bernardi Triggiano</p>

### Script:

Gotica italiana, formale.
<p style="text-align:right">- Maddalena Signorini</p>

### Selected Bibliography:

- Clemens, Raymond, and Timothy Graham. "Rolls and Scrolls." _Introduction to Manuscript Studies_. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2007.
- Franceschini, Gino. "Battista da Montefeltro Malatesta, signora di Pesaro." _Studia Oliveriana_ 6 (1958): 7-43.
- Meiss, Millard. "Scholarship and Penitence in the Early Renaissance: The Image of St. Jerome." _Pantheon_ 32 (1974): 134-40.
- Rice, Eugene F., Jr. _Saint Jerome in the Renaissance._ Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1985.
- Triggiano, Tonia Bernardi. "The Newberry Library’s Italian Prayer Roll: Evidence for Piety and Novelty." _Accesus ad Auctores, Studies in Honor of Christopher Kleinhenz_, edited by Fabian Alfie and Andrea Dini, 353-74. Tempe: Arizona Center for Medieval and Renaissance Studies, 2011.