---
layout: default
title: Account and Memorandum Book of the Works Administration of Santa Maria degli Alberighi in Florence
utl_id: 2852
---

### Description:

Chicago, Newberry VAULT folio Case MS 110<br>
_Account and Memorandum Book of the Works Administration of Santa Maria degli Alberighi in Florence_<br>
Florence, between 1501 and 1529<br>
 <br>
<table border=""0.5"" cellpadding=""1"" cellspacing=""1"" style=""width: 200px; background-color:#F8F8F8;""><tbody><tr><td>Go to [Transcription](https://italian-paleography.library.utoronto.ca/content/transcript_IP_025)<br>
Go to [Manuscript](https://italian-paleography.library.utoronto.ca/islandora/object/italianpaleography%3AIP_025) page</td></tr></tbody></table> <br>


### Background:

The unpretentious parish church of Santa Maria degli Alberighi, located in the heart of medieval Florence, became in the Renaissance the site of an unusual new cult of the Blessed Virgin.  This change of status was occasioned by a scandalous act of sacrilege.  Over the portal of the medieval church stood a fourteenth-century fresco of the Annunciation (reproduced in a miniature on the cover of the Newberry manuscript).  One day in July of 1501 a certain Antonio Rinaldeschi, drunk and enraged after a session of heavy gambling losses, cursed the Virgin for his misfortune and threw a clump of dung at the image.  Blasphemy of the sort was punished vigorously in Florence in the years after the turbulent ministry and execution (1494-1498) of Girolamo Savonarola.  Popular opinion seems to have held that Rinaldeschi’s rapid identification (despite the absence of witnesses), capture, attempted suicide, penitence, trial, and hanging (all within a few weeks) was effected by the Virgin herself; and this opinion almost immediately gave rise to a cult of miracles associated with the image.  Five guardians of works (here _hoperai_) and a works administration (_Opera_) were quickly set up to rehouse the painting; they did so with a series of increasingly elaborate structures in the course of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries to accommodate many new devotees.  The Newberry manuscript is a daily account and memorandum book (_giornale e ricordanze_) of the works administration.  It principally concerns receipts and expenditures for the construction of the new church in its first few decades, but it also includes accounts of the founding events.  A very similar manuscript is preserved at the Bancroft Library of the University of California, Berkeley (fMs. UCB 54).<br><br>
- Paul Gehl<br>


### Script:

Mercantesca dal modulo piccolo, _ductus_ ora più posato ora più rapido, ricca di legamenti.<br>
Da notare:  legamento _ch_ privo del tratto inferiore della _h_ (2r, r. 1: _chonp(agni)a_); _s_ in un sol tratto che lega con lettera precedente e seguente (2r, r.1 ultimo paragrafo: _chose_); _z_ alta in forma di _3_ che discende sotto il rigo e lega con lettera seguente (2r, ultimo r.: _azurro_).<br>
- Maddalena Signorini<br>


### Selected Bibliography:

The Newberry manuscript has not been published. The Bancroft copy and related manuscripts are cited in these sources:<br>
<li style=""font-weight:300;"">Connell, William J. and Giles Constable. _Sacrilege and redemption in Renaissance Florence: the case of Antonio Rinaldeschi_, 20n6, 104-106. Toronto: Centre for Reformation and Renaissance Studies, 2005.<br>
<li style=""font-weight:300;"">Richa, Guiseppe. _Notizie istoriche delle chiese fiorentine_, vol. 8, 236-238 and 249-250. Florence: Viviani, 1754-1762.<br>
Item fully digitized [here](http://collections.carli.illinois.edu/cdm/ref/collection/nby_dig/id/23297).<br>
