---
layout: default
title: Gasparo Tentivo's Atlas
utl_id: 3320
---

###  Description:

Chicago, Newberry VAULT oversize Novacco 7C 1 (PrCt)<br>
Gasparo Tentivo<br>
_Gasparo Tentivo's Atlas_<br>
Venice, 1661

Go to [Transcription]({{ site.baseurl }}/transcription/063)<br>
Go to [Manuscript]({{ site.baseurl }}/www/record.html?id=063) page 

###  Background:

Over the course of 91 charts of islands, ports, and straits, Gasparo Tentivo’s _Il Nautico Ricercato_ takes readers on a journey through the eastern Mediterranean, beginning with descriptions of Venetian holdings in the Adriatic Sea before moving through contested territories in the Aegean Sea and concluding with the coasts of Cyprus and Egypt. Tentivo combines the cartographic genres of the portolan atlas and the isolario, or book of islands, and he includes miniature city views alongside careful tracings of coastlines and descriptive text.

Tentivo was a Venetian sailor and cartographer active in the eastern Mediterranean during the late seventeenth century. By 1668 Venice had lost all its major territories in the Aegean to the Ottomans, but in the 1680s the Venetian navy was reasserting itself. In 1680–81 Tentivo likely sailed with his father, Captain Antonio Tentivo, on a special mission from the Venetian Senate to investigate and write reports on every port in the region. Following his father’s death in 1681, Tentivo was made captain of his own ship, and he likely produced his atlas from first-hand experience at this time.

_Il Nautico Ricercato_ is striking for the practical details that pack the descriptive text accompanying its maps. Unlike most contemporary collections of portolan charts, Tentivo provides extensive guides to each island and port, including sailing directions and the locations of fresh water, wood, and other supplies. This level of information could only have come from someone who had personally visited these harbors and was familiar with the needs of a fleet. However, it is unlikely that Tentivo’s atlas was ever used by sailors. The atlas was never printed, but instead became a prototype for manuscript copies produced for wealthy collectors. The Newberry atlas is one of eleven of these copies to survive, and it was made after Tentivo’s death in 1702. The atlas is written on heavy laid paper bearing a watermark of three crescent moons. Known as the _tre lune_, this watermark commonly appeared on Venetian paper manufactured for export to Islamic regions. While _Il Nautico Ricercato_ was produced for a local audience, the foreign associations of the paper matched its descriptions of lands across the sea.

-  Benjamin Weil

###  Script:

Corsiva (1661) dal tracciato esilissimo, poco legata, ricca di elementi ornamentali nell’esagerata estensione e curvatura dei tratti inferiori e nei fiocchi o spirali al termine dell’asta della _d_ (r. 9: _andando_).<br>
Da notare: la _r_ corsiva divaricata (r. 3: _prova_); la _s_ iniziale che scende sinuosa sotto il rigo (r. 13: _stato_); il legamento _ol_ (r. 11: _favole_).

- Maddalena Signorini

###  Selected Bibliography:
- Donazzolo, Pietro. “Di un Portolano inedito e sconosciuto riguardante il Mediterraneo e specialmente l’Egeo di ‘Gasparo Tentivo.’” _Bollettino della Reale Societa Geografica Italiana_ 3 (1926): 847–53.
- Navari, Leonora. “Gasparo Tentivo’s _Il Nautica Ricercato_: The Manuscripts.” In _Eastern Mediterranean Cartographies_, edited by George Tolias and Dimitris Loupis, 135–55. Athens: Institute for Neohellenic Research, National Hellenic Research Foundation, 2004.
- Tonini, Camillo, and Piero Lucchi, eds. “‘Acciò resti facilitata la navigatione’: i portolani di Gaspare Tentivo.” In _Navigare e descrivere: isolari e portolani del Museo Correr di Venezia XV-XVIII secolo_, 72–79. Venice: Marsilio: Musei Civici Veneziani, 2001.

For the _tre lune_ watermark see:
- Raymond Gaudriault, _Filigranes et Autres Caractéristiques des Papiers Fabriqués en France aux XVIIe et XVIIIe Siècles_ (Paris: CNRS Éditions, J. Telford, 1995) 115–16.

