---
layout: default
title: Letter to Joannes Barbadico from Leonardo Loredano
utl_id: 2689
---

### Description:

Chicago, Newberry Wing MS folio ZW 535 .L868<br>
Leonardo Loredano<br>
_Letter to Joannes Barbadico from Leonardo Loredano_<br>
Venice, 10 August 1516<br>
 <br>
<table border=""0.5"" cellpadding=""1"" cellspacing=""1"" style=""width: 200px; background-color:#F8F8F8;""><tbody><tr><td>Go to [Transcription](https://italian-paleography.library.utoronto.ca/content/transcript_IP_026)<br>
Go to [Manuscript](https://italian-paleography.library.utoronto.ca/islandora/object/italianpaleography%3AIP_026) page</td></tr></tbody></table> <br>


### Background:

This letter was written to Giovanni Barbadico (or Barbarigo), the son of the former Doge Marco, who died in 1486—less than a year after his election—probably after a heated altercation with his brother, and successor as doge, Agostino. Barbarigo was <i>podestà</i> (governor) of Torcello, an island where his family left several signs of their presence, including altarpieces and funerary monuments.<br><br>
After a formulaic introduction in Latin which shows love and respect for the <i>podestà</i>, the letter shifts to Italian. Along with the language, the tone abruptly changes, openly expressing disappointment towards Giovanni Barbarigo. He had sent two men to the Council of Ten—the powerful governing body that oversaw, among other things, matters of state security. <span style=""color:black"">These men were supposed to </span>know the <i>valli del dogado </i>well, the Venetian lagoon and the lands surrounding it. But what the Council of Ten specifically wanted to know from Barbarigo’s men is left unsaid. Still, the Council expressed their indignation at the failure of the men to provide the information they desired. The Council commanded Barbarigo to find two others who could deliver the particulars they needed. These were undoubtedly pressing matters. In the event that Barbarigo could not find other two local informants—which, the letter adds, it would be hard to believe—the <i>podestà </i>would have to send two or three men who could report to the Council of Ten separately.<br><br>
Even though the name Leonardo Loredan, doge of Venice, appears at the letter’s opening, he was not the author. His name endows the letter, drafted by the Council of Ten, the authority of a supreme order of the Republic. In fact, the names of the doges were used to make official laws, sentences, graces, and political decisions issued by the different bodies of the Venetian government.<br><br>
- Erasmo Castellani<br>


### Script:

1r/v, 26v: Italica professionale, moderatamente corsiva, dal tracciato rotondeggiante.<br>
Da notare: le aste molto sviluppate e le abbreviazioni per troncamento a fiocco (r. 1: _etc(etera)_; r. 12 _Dat(um)_); la _g_ con occhiello inferire sopramodulato (r. 3: _giorni_); la _u/v_ con il primo tratto molto sviluppato (r. 10: _uno_); l’uso intensivo delle maiuscole tipico di questa scrittura.<br>
26v: minuscola umanistica usuale, realizzata con penna tagliata grossa che crea chiarosuro nonostante la rpidità del _ductus_.<br>
Da notare: la _g_ con occhiello inferiore oblungo che lega a destra (r. 5: _incargo_); l’uso esclusivo di _s_ di forma maiuscola (r. 1: _soprascritta_); _l_ raddoppiata che lega a destra e sinistra (r. 2: _Paulo_).<br>
- Maddalena Signorini<br>
 <br>
