---
layout: default
title: Collection of Vernacular Prose and Verse
utl_id: 2814
---

### Description:

Chicago, Newberry Library, Wing MS ZW 1 .45<br>
_Collection of Vernacular Prose and Verse_<br>
Italy, around 1450<br>
 <br>
<table border=""0.5"" cellpadding=""1"" cellspacing=""1"" style=""width: 200px; background-color:#F8F8F8;""><tbody><tr><td>Go to [Transcription](https://italian-paleography.library.utoronto.ca/content/transcript_IP_021)<br>
Go to [Manuscript](https://italian-paleography.library.utoronto.ca/islandora/object/italianpaleography%3AIP_021) page</td></tr></tbody></table> <br>


### Background:

During the first half of the fifteenth century, the aftermath of the Black Death (1347-1351) and the subsequent social and political instabilities had a considerable impact on the imagination and memories of European society.  Probably between 1415 and 1450, an anonymous Benedictine friar wrote two related texts in Latin about the _ars moriendi_, the art of dying well according to Christian precepts and protocols.  These essays were a considerable success: hundreds of copies were printed before 1501, including translations in most European vernacular languages.  Two versions of the _Ars moriendi_ circulated.  A longer one contains six chapters devoted to the following topics: an exhortation not to be afraid of death because dying also has positive sides (1), a list of the temptations of a dying man (2), questions to be asked to a dying man (3), an exhortation to imitate Christ’s life (4), suggestions to friends and family on appropriate prayers (6), and how to behave (5).  A shorter version of the _Ars moriendi_ only discusses the different types of temptations a dying man would likely face.<br><br>
Newberry manuscript Wing ZW 1 .45 contains an Italian vernacular copy of the longer version of the _ars moriendi_, also known as “tractato” (f.1r), together with five poems dedicated to the Virgin Mary, including an extract from Dante’s _Paradiso_ 33 (vv.1-21 and 28-30) and a transcription of Petrarch’s canzone “Vergine bella” (cc.52r-55r).  This highly redacted version of the _Fragmenta_’s closing canzone contains numerous significant variants and missing verses (vv.81-82), if we compare it to Petrarch’s partial autograph [Vaticano Latino 3195](https://digi.vatlib.it/view/MSS_Vat.lat.3195/0292), and its manuscript and print tradition.  The presence of Dante’s and Petrarch’s poetry in the text testifies to a diffusion of these canonical texts beyond the boundaries of their original contexts (Dante’s _Commedia_ or Petrarch’s _Rerum vulgarium fragmenta_) and to how different historical and cultural settings transmitted, used, and adapted them.<br><br>
-Isabella Magni<br>
 <br>


### Script:

Gotica tarda priva di contrasto e di compressione laterale, dal modulo e dalla realizzazione non omogenea.<br>
Da notare: la _d_ con asta orizzontale (1r, r. 4: _de_); l’uso di _r_ tonda anche in posizione iniziale o non corretta (52v, r. 2: _terra_; r. 3: _regna_); l’uso alternativo di _ç_ o _z_ in forma di _3_ (53r, r. 2: _alegreça_; r. 15: _lazi_).<br>
- Maddalena Signorini<br>
 <br>


### Selected Bibliography:

Item fully digitized [here](http://collections.carli.illinois.edu/cdm/ref/collection/nby_dig/id/21616).<br>
